>> Scientists announce they
have finally completed the map
of the entire human genome.
Will the information
contained within unlock
our true potential for
health and well-being,
or is there another, more
expansive perspective
on the role genes
play in our lives?
>> It's not the
genes that count now.
It's how we respond
to the environment,
how we respond to the signals
that we send to the genes.
>> This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
After decades of
research, scientists
have recently announced
the completion
of the human genome, what some
call the genetic instruction
book.
Widely used for guiding
biomedical research,
many experts herald this
as a crowning achievement
in the field.
Dr. Bruce Lipton is
a cellular biologist
and a pioneer in the field
of epigenetics, which
takes a comprehensive,
cutting-edge approach
to the understanding of our
relationship to our genes.
>> Most people are really
excited by the fact that
the human genome
has been deciphered.
They've identified how many
genes are in the human genome.
The original reason
for the human genome,
it was thought that genes
control all the characteristics
of our life.
And therefore, if I had a
compendium of all the genes,
I could fix anybody who
has a characteristic they
want to change.
Francis Crick, one of the
co-founders of the story,
came up with something
called the central dogma--
the belief that
genes are the source
of biological information.
They're translated
into another form
of nucleic acid called RNA.
So DNA goes into RNA, which is
like a Xeroxed copy of the DNA.
And then the RNA is
used as a template
to make the proteins
of the body.
According to the central
dogma, information only
flows in one way.
It flows from the DNA to
the RNA to the protein.
This led to an understanding
called genetic determinism.
Genetic determinism
is the belief
that the character of
your life is controlled
by the blueprints, the
DNA that you inherited
at the moment of conception.
>> This genetic determinism
was the prevailing theory
of genetics for many decades.
Dr. Lipton was one of the
first to challenge it,
beginning some 40 years ago.
>> The central dogma was
never proven scientifically.
The central dogma was a
suggestion and hypothesis.
And now, there's
a new science that
really undermines that whole
story of the central dogma.
And the story is
called epigenetics.
Cancer is under genetic control,
so genes control cancer.
The new science is cancer
is under epigenetic control.
Well, epi means above.
And I say epigenetic means
above the gene control.
Genes do not turn on and off.
Genes are blueprints.
Genes can be read or not read.
But the genes don't determine
which one is going to happen.
>> According to epigenetics,
what does determine what will
happen?
>> The environment
and, more importantly--
and this is important-- our
perception of the environment
is the information that
controls our genes.
Change your environment.
You change your
genetic activity.
Change your belief about life.
You can change your
genetic activity.
Now there's something even more
important, and that is this.
The old story is a gene is a
blueprint that makes a protein.
Fact.
The Human Genome Project
now has been whittled down
to that humans have
about 20,000 genes.
There are over 100,000 different
proteins and only 20,000 genes.
Where'd all the other
proteins come from?
And it turns out, how we
respond to the environment,
our perceptions of the world
can alter our genetic blueprints
so that a single
gene blueprint can
be used to create over
3,000 different proteins
from the same blueprint.
>> For Dr. Lipton, the
implications of this
understanding are profound.
>> Under genetic
determinism, we're victim.
The gene creates your life.
And then all of a sudden, we
go from victim to mastery.
But you have to do
it with knowledge.
If you have no
knowledge of epigenetics
but are programmed of the
belief that you a victim
of your heredity,
then your belief
about your family's
heredity becomes your life.
Because if you understand
you are the creator,
then guess what?
For the first time, if you
understand the nature of it,
then you have the power
to change the creation.
>> So how do we go about getting
beyond programmed thinking
and become masters of our genes?
To find out, be sure to watch
part two of this Gaia News
special investigation.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.